## The Black-Scholes model is a pricing model widely used in the valuation of European-style options. The model serves as the basis for the Black-Scholes formula, which is widely used to calculate the theoretical price of European-style options – ie, those which are exercisable only at a specific single future date. In practice, the Black-Scholes option pricing model is often used within a spreadsheet. There are various ‘ready-made’ Black-Scholes spreadsheets available on the internet, as well as numerous resources which explain how to create an option pricing spreadsheet incorporating the Black-Scholes formula (including some of the eBook chapters listed below). Exclusive Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. A section providing a simplified, easy-to-read explanation of the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. Classic article in which Robert Merton builds upon the seminal option pricing theory developed by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, deriving additional formulae. The collection of the ICAEW Library & Information Service\xa0includes a range of articles, books and reports covering aspects of the Black–Scholes model.\n\nThe Black-Scholes model is a mathematical formula used to calculate the theoretical price of an option. It is commonly used for pricing options contracts.\n\n## What is the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model? In the world of finance, the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model stands as a stalwart pillar, providing a comprehensive framework for calculating the theoretical value of financial options. ## How Does the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model Work? Armed with these five components, the Black-Scholes Model calculates the theoretical price of an option using a mathematical formula that's as elegant as it is complex. This means that, according to the Black-Scholes Model, the fair market price of this option should be around $6.64. * With the availability of modern computing power, the Black-Scholes Model can calculate option prices swiftly, enabling real-time decision-making in financial markets. To effectively apply the Black-Scholes Model or any other option pricing model, you need access to high-quality financial data. * Implied volatility is a critical input in option pricing models like Black-Scholes. Intrinio's commitment to delivering accurate, timely, and comprehensive options data makes it a trusted choice for financial professionals looking to leverage the Black-Scholes Model and other option pricing techniques.\n\nThe Black-Scholes Model was the first widely used option-pricing model to consider the element of time value alongside intrinsic value. Time\n\nThe BSM model is used to determine the fair prices of stock options based on six variables: volatility, type, underlying stock price, strike price, time, and